Welcome back.
It's time to talk about this diagram that looks a lot more complicated than it actually is.
The javascript runtime since as we mentioned javascript is a single threaded programming language.
It has only one stack in one heap hence if any other program wants to execute something it has to wait
until the previous program or function is completely executed.
And if I do something that takes a really really long time.
While things are gonna be really slow for our program.
That's not good.
Boo.
That's not nice is it.
We don't like that.
And this is where javascript runtime comes in.
In this case the web browser is working in the background while the synchronous javascript code is running
and it's using something called the web API or the web browser API to communicate and let the J.S. engine
know Hey I'm back with some data some work that you told me to do in the background.
Let's dig deep into this topic the web API comes with the browser Chrome Microsoft Edge safari Firefox
all of them have their JavaScript engine implementation and all of them have a javascript runtime that
provide a web API these web APIs are applications which can do a variety of things like send HDP requests
listen to Dom events maybe click events on a dom delay execution using something like set timeout.
Can you set interval.
You can even be used for caching or database storage on the browser.
Let me show you what I mean.
If we go to the console here and I look at the window object Well this is what the browser provides.
This is the web API that we can use so that if I scroll down here I can see different things that the
browser provides for us that our JavaScript engine can use.
For example if I scroll down to let's go to fetch fetch that is the function to make HDB calls.
We can use that if I keep scrolling down and let's look at something fun like indexed Dobbie D.B. or
index D.B..
That's actually a little database that we can use on our browser.
If I go to application here I see that I have some storage and indexed D.B. that the browser provides
for us.
Very very cool.
If I keep scrolling down I also see something familiar to us such as set time out.
Let's see where is it.
Right here.
Set time out set in terrible.
All of them are provided by the browser.
They're not native to javascript.
So remember that the browsers are helping us create rich Web applications so that users aren't just
sitting around waiting for our javascript to execute anything that can be offloaded.
They'll take care of that for us in the background because you can imagine if the browser had to use
the same javascript thread for execution of these features.
Well it's going to take a really really long time.
So browsers actually underneath the hood use low level programming languages like C++ to perform these
operations in the background.
And these API eyes are called Web API because while their API is provided by a web browser and these
web API eyes are what we call a synchronous that means you can instruct these API to do something in
the background and return data once it's done.
Meanwhile we can just continue working on our javascript call stack and execute functions.
So what are these other two things.
Now we're only going to scratch the surface here because towards the end of this course we have an entire
asynchronous javascript section.
But this is what happens underneath the hood.
We have items on the call stack.
And as soon as something comes up like set timeout that's not part of JavaScript.
It's part of the web API the call stack is going to say oh I have something that's not for me.
Here it's for the web browser for the web API.
So it's going to say hey web API here it is.
I don't know what to do with this.
You take care of it.
The web API is going to say Oh I know what set time it is.
Let me take care of that and do that in the background.
Now with set time out you usually want something to happen afterwards.
So once the Web API is done working on it maybe it's fetching some data from a server it's going to
say all right I'm done with this work here's the data and here's perhaps a callback or what I want you
to do with that data.
And then that event loop is going to say as soon as the call stack is free is going to say hey I have
something for you here.
Would you like to added onto the stack.
And if the stack is empty it's going to push this callback onto the stack.
But that's kind of confusing.
Let's actually code this and demonstrate how it works.
Imagine we had a console dialog and in here we'll just print one.
And by the way this is a really really common interview question so hope that catches your interest
and lets say we'll also do set time out which is part of the web API.
And in here we'll just give it a function and we'll just say console log
in let's say thousand milliseconds or 1 second and then console dialogue.
If you've been working with JavaScript for a while this isn't difficult.
You know what's going to happen.
But just to go over it quickly.
If I go to my browser here let's copy and basis and I run it I get 1 3 2 Why is that.
Well it's because we added a console log to our stack and we logged onto our console and then we removed
that call from our call stack.
And then we went to the next line set timeout.
We added this onto our stack and then immediately the JavaScript engine is going to say oh sit Time
out.
That's a web API.
I don't really care about it.
I don't know what to do with it.
I'm going to just send it off to the web API so this gets moved away from the call stack and gets sent
to the web API.
Now we don't know what's happening on that side of things but we just go to the next line and say console
dot log three it's going to log three now behind the scenes.
The web API is going to take the set timeout it's going to start a timer that is going to run for one
second and once that one second is over.
It's going to push the callback.
That is what to do.
Once it's done running for one second and the callback in this case is console log 2.
It's like it's calling us back saying hey we're ready for you.
One second has passed.
Can you console log to and what happens now.
The console log too goes to the callback you let's go to the diagram goes to the callback queue and
says I'm the first person that's done.
Can you console lock to the event loop is a loop that's constantly running that saying hey is the call
stack empty is the call stack the MP is the call stack empty and the event loop only runs once the call
stack is empty and the entire JavaScript file has been bred in our case console log three no matter
how fast the web API response adds the console log to to the callback queue the then loop one start
putting anything back into the call stack until the call stack is empty and we've run through the entire
file at least once.
So now in case after console log 3 gets printed and popped off the call stack the event loop is going
to tick and say all right.
Can you console log 2 and that's why we get this weird pattern now.
Philip Roberts who has an amazing talk about the javascript event loop and this whole javascript runtime
system created this tool to actually visualize this a lot better than I could explain.
We're gonna go over the same steps that we just did we see that we have function a that calls function
b function b that calls function C and function C that calls set time out.
That's a Web API and it's going to have a callback function that is once it's done running for three
seconds call achieve nirvana and achiever nirvana is going to console log you are enlightened.
Let's see what happens and before I click play see if he can predict what's going to happen and to test
yourself.
Let's have a look.
So we see right away a gets called that's the very first thing that happens because up until now we've
just declared functions and we only run on line 17.
That is we execute functioning so function gets executed and we call B.
So we get we add that to the call stack and then we resume call C that gets added to the call stack
and then C gets called.
That is we add said time out to the call stack.
And what do you think happens here.
Well said timeout now get sent to the web API because well it's a web API and we don't really care what
the web API does with this.
It has its own implementation.
But in this case it's using this timer to just run for three seconds so that it can add it to the callback
queue.
But in the meantime our JavaScript engine doesn't care what's happening it's just going to keep working
on the call stack.
So if I resume here you'll see that A B and C all get popped off the stack while the timer is running.
Now see what happens when this timer ends.
Want to resume and look at that.
It finished in three seconds.
So it's going to put it back or put it into the callback queue and the callback queue is going to say
to the event loop Hey can I can I come back to the stack I'm lonely.
Can I come back to the stack.
And the event loop says Ho ho ho hold on.
Let me check is the call stack empty.
Yes it is.
Has the entire file been run.
Yes.
Well line 17 is the last line.
So that's the last thing that we want to run.
OK.
You're allowed to go back on the stack.
So I'm going to resume and look at that.
The achieve nirvana is going to get popped or pushed onto the stack console log gets printed and then
we pop everything off the stack.
Congratulations.
We've just achieved Nirvana.
That's not too bad is it.
Now here's a fun little question for you.
What happens if we do the exact same thing but this time add zero here.
What do you think will happen.
Well if I run this I get 1 3 to still now.
Like I said before this is a very common interview question.
The reason that happens is that no matter how fast this set timeout timer happens it still gets sent
to the web API still get sent to the callback queue and the event loop still needs to check those two
checks Hey is the stack empty and has the entire file been run in our case.
No we are still waiting on console log to run.
And only then will I push our callback function our console log to our call stack.
How cool is that and using this method we're able to have this power of asynchronous code that is instead
of being limited to one call stack and one memory heap whenever we get tasks that can be asynchronous
that take a long time possibly like modifying dom or making HDP requests.
Well in that case we can just send that off to the browser the browser can just run that in the background
and whenever we're ready it can just use its callback to an event loop to notify us.
All right.
That was a long one.
Let's take a quick break and I'll see you in the next video.
Bye bye.